---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Anarchist Federation
Title: Basic Wilderness Fieldcraft: Skills For Revolutionary Survival No.9
Author: theverdantfuture
Date: Mon, 18 Jan 2021 23:46:28 -0500
Link: https://iaf-fai.org/2021/01/19/basic-wilderness-fieldcraft/
 
By Eepa
 
When many people think of living outdoors, they think of Camping. Camping, 
backpacking, and hiking are recreational activities that are an enjoyable way to
experience nature during those rare moments of free time. These activities can 
incorporate elements of bushcraft/fieldcraft, but these activities have very 
different expectations for required gear, periods of time expected to be afield 
without resupply, and security considerations.
 
In this primer on living in the wilderness, we will discuss the needs of people 
who are living on the land as they move to safer territory and the needs of 
people who will be living remotely long term as a bugout or as a function of 
being involved in a resistance struggle. This will include the basic elements of
fieldcraft for a revolutionary: water, shelter, fire, food, and navigation.
 
Water
-----
 
Water is what will get ya. A lack of it will leave you disoriented, tired, and 
dead. Unclean water will get you sick, potentially killing you, or will just 
taste disgusting, limiting your intake, leading to dehydration. Clean, palatable
water is the first priority of any person seeking to live off grid. As a someone
utilizing field craft to survive, it is advised that you maintain a redundancy 
of methods to get safe drinking water. We will examine three easy methods to 
take with you when you venture into the woods in a bugout situation.
 
Steel Water Bottle
 
The first think you should carry is a steel water bottle. Make sure the bottle 
doesn’t have any plastic on the main body and make sure it is single walled (not
insulated double walled). This will allow you to carry water with you and will 
allow you to boil water to sanitize it. Boiling water for 1 minute is sufficient
to clean it according to the WHO. Make sure it is a rolling boil with 
consistent, fast bubbling. That’s when you start the clock for the 1 minute 
time. 
 
Boiling water only sanitizes it, it does not purify it. By covering the end of 
the bottle with a bandana and securing it to the mouth with a hair-tie or rubber
band, you can filter out a lot of sediment, making the water taste significantly
less gritty. This the most time consuming way to get clean water. You need to 
drink the remainder of your water, filter fresh water into the bottle, start a 
fire, get the bottle to a boil, let cool. This is a fail safe, but there are 
faster ways to get clean water when you are on the move. See the video below by 
the press filter, for a water boiling demonstration. 
 
Tablets & Chlorine Bleach
 
Tried and tested, you can use water purification tablets or a small amount of 
unscented plain household chlorine Bleach. This option again benefits from pre 
filtering the water through a bandana. It will leave a taste, something that 
dedicated water purification tablets try to correct as much as possible. There 
will still be a taste with tablets. 
 
Bleach can be purchased in bulk and stored in dropper bottles, making dispensing
correct amounts easier. This is by far the cheapest and easiest to acquire 
method of purifying water. Here is a guide from the EPA on amounts of bleach to 
use with a given volume of water:
<b>Volume of Water</> <b>Amount of 6% Bleach to Add*</> <b>Amount of 8.25% Bleach to Add*</>
1 quart/liter   2 drops                     2 drops                       
1 gallon        8 drops                     6 drops                       
2 gallons       16 drops (1/4 tsp)          12 drops (1/8 teaspoon)       
4 gallons       1/3 teaspoon                1/4 teaspoon                  
8 gallons       2/3 teaspoon                1/2 teaspoon                  
 
Tablets come in a wide variety of forms. One of my favorites is the two step 
Potable Aqua Water Purification Tablets (iodine based purification), with 
included PA Plus, a neutralizing agent that reduces the flavor of the initial 
purification tablets. These come is small bottles of 50 tablets that will treat 
a 32 oz bottle of water 25 times. Chlorine tablets are also available, though 
the taste has led me to have less experience with these tablets. One special 
note about Iodine tablets, they will stain soft water bladders, so take that 
into consideration.
 
When treating the water in your bottle, it is important to very slightly loosen 
the lid of the bottle after mixing, and allow some of the water with the 
purification chemical to flow past the threads on the mount and lid of your 
bottle. Failure to do this will leave untreated water on the mouth and lid, 
potentially infecting you. The colder it is, the longer you will need to keep 
the tablets in the water before drinking (cold water reduces the efficiency of 
the purification chemicals). Instructions will remind you of these factors.
 
An alternative to these is a UV light water purification lamp. These are stirred
in water while illuminated, killing harmful microbes. These have a major 
downside; they need batteries. If you have a solar charger integrated into your 
system, this is a good option. Otherwise, you will be caring a lot of heavy 
batteries for extended use. 
 
Water Filters
 
Water filters are the top of the line when it comes to getting clean, tasty 
water. Filters require that water be forced through various filtering elements 
in order to produce clean, drinkable water. 
 
Squeeze Filters
 
One of the most basic is a water bottle adaptor like the Sawyer Squeeze. The 
benefit to this is that you can drink from any bottle with standard water bottle
threads (like a SmartWater or Aquafina). You do have to squeeze while drinking, 
which wears out bottles.
 
Pump Filters
 
Pump type filters are excellent for their ability to fill multiple containers 
fast. They require a lot of pumping, which can be taxing if you are trying to 
conserve calories in a long term bugout or bushcrafting situation. The MSR 
Guardian is the top choice in the pump filter category for its durability and 
self cleaning features. These are best for small groups as their size and weight
is a bit much for an individual.
 
Gravity Filters
 
Gravity filters are excellent choices for static or semi-static camps with 
multiple people. Water is purified by hanging a bag and letting gravity pull the
water through the filter. This can be done overnight and topped of throughout 
the day, providing a ready source of water for refills. The Katadyn Base Camp, 
the LifeStraw Mission, and the Platypus GravityWorks are good options for this 
role. These are best for small groups as their time to filter can be long, but 
they do filter larger volumes of water without much supervision or effort.
 
You can also build gravity filters for long term survival in the wilderness. 
Here is a good video demonstrating a self made gravity filter:
 
[iframe 1 (link #1)]
 
Press Filter
 
One of the best options for a personal use either in a bugout bag or for 
individual patrol is the Grayl Geopress. This all in one filter acts as both the
filter and the bottle. Instead of pumping or squeezing, this bottle works by 
filling the bottle with water, inserting the filter, and pushing down with your 
body weight. This is a super efficient means of filtering water requiring very 
few calories of effort. You can press once to fill your steel bottle, then press
again to fill the Geopress. That gives you a days worth of water extremely fast,
silently, and with no trace. The filters are good for ~115 days of use with 3 
uses per day. If you are filtering extremely dirty water, this may be reduced. 
If you are planning on being out for more than 100 days, carry a spare filter. 
Here’s a video explaining how to source your water for the geopress:
 
[iframe 2 (link #2)]
 
Shelter
-------
 
Shelter is what you use to insulate yourself from the elements; from the cold, 
from the heat, from the sun, from the wind. Typically this is used while 
sleeping, but it also might be useful when doing tasks around camp. The needs of
fieldcraft shelters are different than the needs for camping. In fieldcraft, we 
need our shelters to provide three things: durability, ease of 
deployment/takedown, and concealment. These factors will change based on the 
environment so we will examine three options that can be used in the situations 
you might find yourself.
 
Tarp
 
Tarps are the most basic form of shelter. They provide shade, protection from 
precipitation, and some protection from wind. Tarps can be made into a variety 
of shelters using surrounding trees or trekking poles as supports. Tarps can 
also be used to protect you from precipitation in the form of a bed roll or 
poncho and can be used to create a gurney in an emergency. Tarps also serve a 
useful role in serving as a waterproof/water resistant barrier for more 
semi-permanent bush shelters. 
 
Essentially, tarps are some of the most useful objects you can have to fit a 
variety of situations. Important factors to look for when selecting a tarp is 
material, seems, and grommets.
 
Nylon ripstop is the way to go for tarps as it resists tearing and offers good 
water proofing naturally. 40D Nylon is good when you are really concerned about 
weight, but for long term field craft, 70D will be much more durable. Seems 
should be heat taped or sealed to prevent leaks. Grommets and loops should be 
reinforced to prevent tear-out.
 
The top recommendation for a good, durable tarp would be AquaQuest. Their 
defender series (2.4-3.3lbs) is pretty bullet proof but their guide series 
(0.9-1.2lbs) will work well if weight/bulk is a concern. 10×7 is good for an 
individual, but 10×10 expands your tarp use options and allows for up to two 
people sleeping, four to six sitting.
 
Concealment is a factor here, so depending on your environment choose an 
appropriate color. Remember, plain olive drab green looks more like a typical 
backpacker and might raise less suspicions than a camo tarp. OD green is very 
good at blending with backgrounds at a distance. These can be quickly taken 
down, even in an emergency abandonment of camp by cutting the ridge line, 
pulling ground spikes and stuffing it into your backpack.
 
There are dozens of ways to set up a tarp shelter. Try some different styles 
when camping and build an understanding of which styles work best for your 
needs.
 
[iframe 3 (link #3)]
 
[iframe 4 (link #4)]
 
Bivy
 
Bivies are… intimate. They are designed to hold you and your sleeping bag, maybe
with the sleeping pad inside and maybe outside. They are quick to set up, 
provide adequate protection, and are extremely low profile. You want to buy 
quality materials here, usually gore-tex, and you want to make sure that there 
is adequate ventilation to vent the moisture from your breath, especially if you
have to zip up in inclement weather. A hoop to keep the bivy off of your face is
really a creature comfort worth looking for. Bivies are incredibly good at 
blending in given proper site location. For urban/suburban travel in bad 
weather, the bivy is a good option to consider. Do your research and practice 
using it a lot in your local climate. I have had good experiences with the Dutch
army surplus bivy, but the camo patter would stick out in urban environments. 
[image 1 (link #5)] 
 
Tent
 
Tents can be the most secure form of shelter you can have in a field craft 
situation. They resist wind and precipitation better than any form of rapidly 
moveable shelter out there. The type recommended for fieldcraft use is the 
pyramid tent. Pyramid tents com in three to twelve sided pyramids, with their 
unique feature being support via a single center pole. They are extremely quick 
to set up. Four stakes into the corners, then erect the pole inside. Done. These
are very stable in wind and handle precipitation well. They are also easy to get
dressed in and can protect yourself and your gear in all conditions.
 
[image 2 (link #6)]
 
[image 3 (link #7)][image 4 (link #8)]
 
[image 5 (link #9)]
 
[image 6 (link #10)]
 
The Luxe Outdoors Minipeak Pyramid Tent (2.18lbs) is a great pyramid tent that 
allows for mosquito netted inner tent (either one or two person). 
 
A lightweight and rugged option (though expensive) is the Mountain Laurel 
Designs Duomid (1.1lbs). Built with strong silnylon or DCF, these tents are the 
gold standard for pyramid tents. Upgrading to an interior mosquito net is 
expensive. 
 
[iframe 5 (link #11)]
 
Other tents will work, but the flat panels of a pyramid tent are easy to mend 
should they require it and a broken center pole can be easily replaced with a 
staff from a sapling or with crossed poles outside of the tent. Other tent 
designs, like the ones that use crossed flexible fiberglass poles, will fail 
under high winds, leaving you with a tent bowing down against you and 
transferring water onto you in the night. The more seems a tent has, the more 
points of failure you will have to watch. Backpacking tents are also are much 
slower to take down and stow should you need to evacuate camp in an emergency.
 
Bushcraft Shelters for Weather & Extended Stay
 
Bushcraft shelters are different than camping shelters in that they use 
materials gathered from nature to build the shelter. Bushcraft shelters offer 
better insulation from wind, rain, snow than tents or tarps alone, though they 
require more calories and time to make. If you plan on being static for a period
of time, one of these shelters can serve you well. Be aware that there is a 
flood of trendy ‘bushcraft shelter’ construction videos that are questionable at
best and downright dangerous at worst. Learn to make these shelters from books 
and respected outdoor survival instructors. 
 
The most basic form of bushcraft shelter is the basic lean-to. A good lean-to 
built against a rock face or facing a fire can provide substantial protection 
from snow and winds. Learn this type of shelter first along with how to make 
bedding, then develop your skills from there.
 
[iframe 6 (link #12)]
 
[iframe 7 (link #13)]
 
[iframe 8 (link #14)]
 
[iframe 9 (link #15)]
 
Fire
----
 
Starting fire reliably is incredibly important. Unlike recreational camping or 
backpacking, we do not want to rely on fuel resupply to provide us with heat. 
This means starting a fire from scratch. As with water, we want to pack with 
redundancy in mind, to make sure we can start a fire no matter what happens. 
Usually this means having three fire starters and two sources of tinder.
 
Fire Starters
 
There are many kinds of fire starters out there, some of which you can construct
in the field if you have a knife. We will look at carry along fire starters you 
can pack with you and practice with now, focusing on the recommended fire 
starters for fieldcraft. There are other options; feel free to try them as well.
These are just the ones I am recommending.
 
Windproof Lighter or Matches
 
When looking for lighters, the first thing that comes to mind is the ubiquitous 
Bic lighter. These are butane lighters that burn for a long time and are 
reliable, unless they get cold or are exposed to wind. The UCO Stormproof or SM 
torch butane lighter are a good go-to option for lighters as they ignite butane 
in a high temperature torch that resists wind better. Keep lighters against your
body in an inner pocket to keep them warm and ready for use. 
 
[image 7 (link #16)]
 
Matches are fickle, but stormproof matches will work in all kinds of weather and
will work even after being submerged in water. Stormproof matches also have 
longer guaranteed burn time, meaning you have longer to ignite your tinder and 
kindling to get your fire started. In practical use, I have found the UCO Titan 
Stormproof Matches, with their 25 second burn time, to be an excellent fire 
starter. There are other makers out there, so feel free to try some and find a 
match maker you like.
[image 8 (link #17)] 
 
Ferro Rods
 
Ferro rods produce a shower of sparks when the spine of a knife or axe is pushed
along their surface (the right knives can be found here[18]). They produce 
extremely hot sparks (5,500°F/3,000°C) and are excellent for igniting dry 
tinder. Most of the ferro rods you see sold with survival kits or as knife 
accessories are incredibly small. Get a ferro rod that is 6-8″ in length for a 
good long strike, and 1/2″ in width for strength and long-term striking. Also, 
get one that is predrilled for a lanyard so that you can better grip while 
striking, secure the rod to your pack, and find it if you drop it (use a visible
color for the lanyard).
 
I use a Bayite rod with great success. There are other great options out there. 
Make sure you get the right size and test it. Practice sparking it. As long as 
it produces a good, strong shower of sparks, it doesn’t matter what brand it is.
 
Fresnel Lens
 
A fresnel lens is a flat lens that concentrates light into a focused beam that 
can start fires. A simple, flexible, plastic lens the size of a credit card can 
be a failsafe fire starter, provided the sun is out. These are very cheap and 
easy to spread throughout your kit, so that if you become separated from your 
backpack, you will still have a fire starter in your wallet, boot, pocket, etc. 
You can buy 4-10 lenses for less than $10USD.
 
Tinder
 
You gotta have tinder to get a spark going. No this isn’t marketing for a dating
app. Tinder is the fundamental micro-fuel you ignite to get a fire going. Tinder
ignites into an open flame, a flame that is used to ignite kindling, which in 
turn is used to ignite primary fuel. Most tender you need can be found in nature
for free. As always, we like to carry a backup incase the weather isn’t playing 
nice. A good manufactured option would be a magnesium bar. When shaved into 
small, thin pieces, it will ignite incredibly hot and will get a fire burning in
little time. Get a Doan Magnesium Fire Starter or a bar of pure magnesium. 
Imitations often use less pure magnesium that can be hard to ignite. 
[image 9 (link #19)] 
 
At home you can make tinder by rubbing cotton balls in petroleum jelly. These 
can be stored in 35mm film canisters or other sealable plastic tube. They ignite
and burn for a while, allowing you to get a fire started.
 
[image 10 (link #20)]
 
[image 11 (link #21)]
 
Fatwood can also be found or purchased and brought with you. When shaved into 
thin strips, it readily takes a spark and ignites.
 
Building a Fire
 
Here are some useful videos on fire building: 
 
[iframe 10 (link #22)]
 
[iframe 11 (link #23)]
 
[iframe 12 (link #24)]
 
[iframe 13 (link #25)]
 
Considerations for Camp Fires
 
Fires are extremely useful for cooking and sanitizing as well as for keeping 
warm and cheerful. They also can be a dead giveaway of your presence and 
location. Keep fires small, limit the amount of smoke produced, and construct 
fire reflectors to reflect light and heat into your shelter and not into the 
wilderness. 
 
The best time for stealth fires is dawn and dusk, when smoke will be obscured 
better than in the day and light from the fire won’t act as a beacon in the 
night. You can use small collapsible wood stoves to cook on that efficiently 
burn very little fuel and produce very little light. 
 
[image 12 (link #26)]
 
[image 13 (link #27)]
 
Remember that smell is one of your enemies when trying to conceal your position.
Cooking in the evening or at night will limit the chances of accidentally 
exposing passers-by to the smell of your cooking. Cooking smells are also a 
concern when in bear country, so keep your food stuffs away from camp and hung 
from a tree in a bear bag.
[image 14 (link #28)] 
 
Food
----
 
Food for fieldcraft is a tricky thing to balance. For bugging out, you need 
enough calories to last you until you reach your bugout location, hopefully with
comrades who have provisions or a survival camp. For a long term camp either 
static or nomadic, you need a consistent source of proteins, carbs, vitamins, 
minerals, and food preservation. This will require resupply and caching. We will
examine some of the means of acquiring and storing food for long term survival 
and will look at short term survival foods for a bugout scenario.
 
Proteins
 
Acquiring proteins in nature is usually accomplished through hunting, trapping, 
or fishing. Hunting firearms have already been discussed in our Secondary 
Firearms[29] article in this series. What was not discussed was hunting skills 
for small game (what you will want if you are one to three adults) and for large
game (when you have four or more adults).
 
Hunting & Trapping Small Game
 
Small game can be broken down into birds and small mammals. The most important 
way to practice hunting these is to a) go to the range and shoot clays with your
shotgun or rolling targets with your rimfire or bow, b) practice making traps, 
and b) go small game hunting.
 
Traps
 
Trapping is one of the most basic low energy ways to get food. Snares, 
deadfalls, and cage traps can be readily constructed, placed on game trails or 
near burrows, yielding occasional food with minimal effort. This should not be 
your primary means of capturing food, but can act as a supplemental source.
 
[iframe 14 (link #30)]
 
[iframe 15 (link #31)]
 
Shooting Small Game
 
There are some very easy exercises to practice shotgun handling for hunting. 
Here’s a great demonstration of these exercises:
 
[iframe 16 (link #32)]
 
Moving target marksmanship is extremely important for hunting small game. 
Shooting clays has turned into a sport unto itself, but it has tremendous value 
for shooting moving targets.
 
[iframe 17 (link #33)]
 
[iframe 18 (link #34)]
 
For rimfire hunting, rolling, self-healing targets are the way to go for live 
fire practice. I recommend models like the top hat, which makes movement less 
predictable and a ball for more predictable movement.
 
[iframe 19 (link #35)]
 
Of course the most important way to practice is to get out and do some hunting 
once your fundamental marksmanship, gun handling. and gun safety are solid. You 
will only learn small game behavior by spending time observing them. 
 
Hunting Large Game
 
For large game, be sure to take time to understand how to take an ethical shot. 
A bad shot can wound an animal, leaving them wandering for days, slowly dying in
pain. Only take ethical shots and always track wounded game. 
 
[iframe 20 (link #36)]
 
[iframe 21 (link #37)]
 
Field Dressing Game
 
Remember, if you kill it, you eat it (so long as it isn’t diseased). Here are 
some helpful field dressing/butchering techniques for basic game types (Trigger 
Warning: Graphic):
 
[iframe 22 (link #38)]
Field Dressing a Squirrel 
 
[iframe 23 (link #39)]
Field Dressing a Duck 
 
[iframe 24 (link #40)]
Field Dressing a Pheasant (or Turkey) 
 
[iframe 25 (link #41)]
Field Dressing Pigeon (or Dove) 
 
[iframe 26 (link #42)]
Field Dressing a Rabbit for Meat and Fur 
 
[iframe 27 (link #43)]
Field Dressing Large Game 
 
Fishing
 
Fishing can provide you with very important nutrients. Active fishing can be 
done with a rod and reel, a spear, or with archery. Inactive fishing uses fish 
traps or gill nets.
 
Active fishing requires you to bring gear with you, or the construction of gear 
while in the field. The simplest way to fish is by bringing a package of hooks, 
a roll of line, making a fishing pole in the field and sourcing bait by finding 
it. Here are some examples: 
 
[iframe 28 (link #44)]
 
Learning Indigenous skills such as fiber production, hook making, etc., will 
prepare you to fish with what you can gather naturally: 
 
[iframe 29 (link #45)]
 
Here are some examples of fishing traps: 
 
[iframe 30 (link #46)]
 
[iframe 31 (link #47)]
 
[iframe 32 (link #48)]
 
Carbs and Vitamins
 
Most of your carbs and vitamins will come from foraging, unless you cultivate 
food for long term encampments. Foraging for edibles is a highly regional 
pursuit. You need to spend time learning to identify edible plants, understand 
their nutritional/medicinal values, and understand what time of the year they 
will be found. This can be accomplished by reading books about wild edibles, 
taking survival courses in your area, and learning from elders who still have 
traditional knowledge of the land and plants.
 
I recommend the following books for my area, but local cultural and survival 
groups will have more regionally specific guides to check out. I use the 
following for where I live in southern California:
 
Native American Ethnobotany by Daniel E. Moerman
 
Probably the most important compendium of information about Indigenous plant 
uses in North America. I have learned about plant uses I would have never known 
about from this book, filling in the gaps where my elders no longer have 
memories. This does not teach plant identification, only traditional uses by 
tribe. If you live in North America, I highly advise getting a copy or 
requesting your library purchase a copy.
[image 15 (link #49)] 
 
Kumeyaay Ethnobotany: Shared Heritage of the Californias by Michael 
Wilken-Robertson
 
This book is great for me because the Kumeyaay are a sister tribe to my Kwapa 
people. We share so many of the same traditions, plants being a big one.
[image 16 (link #50)] 
 
California Foraging: 120 Wild and Flavorful Edibles from Evergreen Huckleberries
to Wild Ginger (Regional Foraging Series) by Judith Larner Lowry
 
A part of a regional foraging series with good general information. Worth 
picking one up for your region.
[image 17 (link #51)] 
 
The Sea Forager’s Guide to the Northern California Coast by Kirk Lombard
 
While this book has lots of information on seafood of the animal variety, it 
also has useful information about edible algaes!
[image 18 (link #52)] 
 
Mushrooms of the Redwood Coast: A Comprehensive Guide to the Fungi of Coastal 
Northern California by Noah Siegel
 
A good guide for foraging edible mushrooms in more humid forests to the north. 
Mushrooms can be rewarding provided you take the time to study and practice.
[image 19 (link #53)] 
 
You also will need to understand what kind of processing they require. Some, 
like acorns, require boiling to remove tannic acid. Others, like mesquite beans,
require grinding to turn the pods into useable flower. Having knowledge ahead of
time, without needing reference material in the field will only come with 
practice and developing relationships with the plants you harvest.
 
Minerals & Preservation
 
Salt. It is a vital nutrient and an effective means of preserving food. Many 
minerals will be naturally absorbed from the meat and plants you eat, but salt 
has no substitute. For shorter journeys, carrying a small 6oz container of 
iodized salt will serve you well. For long term encampments, you will need to 
buy salt in bulk and store it in caches, eventually seeking resupply through 
purchase or trade. Creative ways to store salt include filling a sanitized 
bucket with table salt / sea salt, vibrating to settle it, and add a desiccant 
package. You can also vacuum seal plain white, unflavored livestock salt-licks 
(no additives or antibiotics). you can get from a local feed store. Iodized salt
though is the standard for maintaining health while cooking. You might use the 
bulk salt from a salt lick to make jerky for example, but use iodized salt when 
cooking food. Pink salt has additional minerals in it which can be a benefit for
long term use.
 
Have a salt plan. If you can source it locally in the wilderness, you are lucky.
See where your ancestors got it from (if you are Indigenous). You will need 
8-9lbs of salt per person per year.
 
Navigation
----------
 
The ability to navigate is an important skill. Today, most people navigate with 
their cell phone. Cell phones are problematic for fieldcraft for several 
reasons: they rely on spotty cell phone service, they report back your position 
to cell phone service providers, their triangulation can be ineffective, they 
require charging and may be susceptible to bad weather.
 
GPS is the next navigation tool most people turn to. GPS can be very useful when
covering large amounts of terrain as they can store a large number of maps and 
satellite photos, they can leave ‘breadcrumbs’ allowing you to retrace your 
route, they can mark cache locations and navigate you back to their location, 
and they can provide you with precise coordinates for coordinating with other 
people. 
 
They face a few potential downfalls to the long term operation of a GPS device. 
First, they need batteries, which means you will need to dedicate time to 
charging. This can be remedied with the mobile PowerFilm LightSaver, which can 
be secured to your pack and charge your device as you walk, or can be left in a 
sunny south facing place around camp. In cold weather, you will need to sleep 
with the batteries for this device to keep them from losing charge in the cold. 
You also will want to avoid devices that have the ability to transmit or 
communicate, lest you unintentionally reveal your location (such as with the 
Garmin GPSMAP 66i). Recommended GPS units include the Garmin GPSMAP 65s, the 
Garmin GPSMAP 64csx, or you can use a rugged tablet like the Samsung Galaxy Tab 
Active3 with a USB GPS/GLONASS dongle. 
 
The ultimate form of navigation relies on maps and a compass. Orienteering or 
analog navigation has the benefit of never snitching on your location and not 
being subject to battery charge or satellite coverage (or availability). The 
basic tools you will need for this are United States Geological Survey (USGS) 
Quadrangle (Quad, 1:24000) or Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) 1:50000 maps for 
all lands you expect to cover during a bugout or an encampment, waterproof map 
holder, a lensatic compass, and pace counting beads (often called ranger beads).
 
Quadrangle maps can be purchased from the USGS, NRCan, or at local sporting 
goods stores, parks, or book stores usually for $8-$15USD. For $15-$17USD you 
can get maps from the secondary market that are printed with waterproof inks on 
waterproof paper. These maps are bulkier and heavier, but are extremely durable,
a benefit you will have to weigh given your climates propensity for sustained 
precipitation. Here are some videos about understanding topographic maps:
 
[iframe 33 (link #54)]
 
[iframe 34 (link #55)]
 
[iframe 35 (link #56)]
 
[iframe 36 (link #57)]
 
Waterproof map holders are used for storing maps in a safe manner and for 
navigation using the visible portion of a folded map while it is raining. There 
are a wide variety of makers, so shop around, read reviews, and test it with 
plain paper using a fountain, hose, or shower. Once you know it is secure, you 
should be good to go. 
 
Lensatic compass are rugged and reliable means of navigation. Buy a quality one 
and practice with it as much as you can while outdoors. Recommended versions 
include the Cammenga Lensatic Tritium Compass 3H (self illuminating) or the 
Cammenga Phosphorescent Lensatic Compass 27 (needs to be charged in sunlight 
during the day). Here is an introductory guide to using these compasses:
 
[iframe 37 (link #58)]
 
[iframe 38 (link #59)]
 
[iframe 39 (link #60)]
 
[iframe 40 (link #61)]
 
The last item you will need is a pace counter (also called ranger beads). This 
is useful for dead reckoning, the ability to maintain awareness of your position
relative to a starting point. These can be bought, but are extremely easy to 
make on your own. Here are some videos about making pace beads, figuring out 
your pace count, and utilizing them.
 
[iframe 41 (link #62)]
 
[iframe 42 (link #63)]
 
[iframe 43 (link #64)]
 
It is really recommended that you learn from an experienced navigator, either a 
friend or in a course. This is worth the money to learn to do right. You can do 
it, and this will save your life. There are many other navigation skills that 
you will develop with practice. Always keep learning!
 
[iframe 44 (link #65)]
 
Conclusion
----------
 
Basic survival skills require practice to cultivate. They require an inquisitive
mind that is always trying new things and learning whenever possible. Nature 
will reward you for responsibly practicing living in communion with the land and
waters. Remember to always leave your practice camps as close to as you found 
them, as you can. Get out there, stay safe, and good luck!
 
Links: 
[1]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/G6AwCiQ68KI?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[2]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/miuXQ6QqLGc?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[3]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/ZV92xni5q8w?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[4]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/_1jhcepnnCY?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[5]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/bivi_02.jpg?w=912 (image)
[6]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/download-7.jpg (image)
[7]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/img_9132-600x450-1.jpg (image)
[8]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/20200809_175351.jpg (image)
[9]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/20200715_194625.jpg (image)
[10]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/img_4040.jpg (image)
[11]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/PECKatPtIUU?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[12]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/UsbSMplJ6g4?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[13]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/cT5-pAzTuSA?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[14]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/SAlFy67h-0k?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[15]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/uxwEFQnDga0?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[16]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/uco-stormproof-torch-tape-studio-flame.jpg?w=600 (image)
[17]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/mt-tsm1_2-1.jpg?w=1023 (image)
[18]: https://iaf-fai.org/2021/01/04/cutting-tools-for-field-craft/ (link)
[19]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/81o9qxmybfl._ac_sl1500_.jpg?w=1024 (image)
[20]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/xl_38577filmcanister.jpg (image)
[21]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/unnamed-2.png (image)
[22]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/T4Z9yWEGQBY?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[23]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/HwmBMoDuhMU?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[24]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/29h16GQ-OQ4?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[25]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/VdLfdjX6smU?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[26]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/61u4bx5ecel._ac_sl1500_.jpg (image)
[27]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/81qqcnkksal._ac_sl1500_.jpg (image)
[28]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/bear-muda-triangle-bear-bag.jpg?w=744 (image)
[29]: https://iaf-fai.org/2020/11/11/skills-for-revolutionary-survival-6-secondary-firearms/ (link)
[30]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/fOZK_dlZO4E?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[31]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/57NhfFwyhQE?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[32]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/D9VXbUTU0cs?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[33]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/pW24yYI9ooA?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[34]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/tXo0WUiCx34?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[35]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/R-j-15Oq3UU?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[36]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/xOZN2WaHDrg?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[37]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/yf6x0FIb56k?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[38]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/gQpwy0aYw_E?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[39]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/jl6rT4-cohk?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[40]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/FqTlDmUCjek?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[41]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/sde85XJpj1E?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[42]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/Z4CENDerlUc?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[43]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/EdFtwFN5G4A?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[44]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/lXEcZZvLB8Q?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[45]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/J0wbeWqyOP8?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[46]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/yAB7KljY-9E?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[47]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/1JWxWoPkH40?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[48]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/riKgxP9ksas?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[49]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/51evd-8apsl.jpg?w=389 (image)
[50]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/91xqqx2uoel.jpg?w=813 (image)
[51]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/91dtrjnabhl.jpg?w=741 (image)
[52]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/71zxjucvdnl.jpg?w=663 (image)
[53]: https://iaffaiorg.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/a18qiv72fal.jpg?w=810 (image)
[54]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/CoVcRxza8nI?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[55]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/sjZVebpMIn0?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[56]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/uLSanPt1BQc?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[57]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/mF1pOj27DUY?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[58]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/SzCFqnzt1DU?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[59]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/J5GKGq379xE?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[60]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/wU8F5JqGYwM?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[61]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/jiipaN5iXXY?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[62]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/aatjjSdDBds?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[63]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/i74sVcitHuA?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[64]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/lDmCUzgd-f8?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)
[65]: https://www.youtube.com/embed/-mAojFrdcuE?version=3&rel=1&showsearch=0&showinfo=1&iv_load_policy=1&fs=1&hl=en&autohide=2&wmode=transparent (iframe)

