---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Nationhood
Title: Federal Budget 2019: Indigenous Women and Children Left Behind - Again
Author: Pam Palmater
Date: Wed, 20 Mar 2019 13:06:00 -0400
Link: http://indigenousnationhood.blogspot.com/2019/03/federal-budget-2019-indigenous-women.html
 
 
[image 1 (link #2)][1]
 
(Pam Palmater, photo by Ben Powless)
 
 
As expected, the Assembly of First Nations was first out of the gate offering 
glowing praise for this Liberal government’s federal budget, followed shortly 
thereafter by the Metis National Council and Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami – the three
male-dominated national Aboriginal organizations. Their organizations have seen 
substantial increases in funding for their political organizations in recent 
years. Meanwhile, the Native Women’s Association of Canada – the only political 
organization representing Indigenous women at the national level - issued its 
own press release criticizing the government for failing Indigenous women. They 
accused the federal government of, once again, ignoring the pressing needs of 
Indigenous women and in so doing, not only hampering reconciliation but 
breaching their core human rights. NWAC is especially aggrieved about this lack 
of funding for Indigenous women and families, given the urgent need to address 
murdered and missing Indigenous women and girls.
 
 
The exclusion of Indigenous women and girls as a priority in this federal budget
is a glaring example of the ongoing racism and sexism that is so deeply embedded
in Canada’s laws, policies, practices and institutions – the very same racism 
and sexism the Liberal government claims to be against. When the federal 
government announced the National Inquiry into Murdered and Missing Indigenous 
Women and Girls in 2016, former Liberal Minister for the Status of Women, Patty 
Hadju, spoke of the urgent need to address the longstanding racism and sexism 
embedded in Canada’s institutions. Yet, this urgent policy objective is not 
reflected in any substantive way in federal budget 2019. In fact, there are no 
funds allocated for a comprehensive plan to address violence against women 
generally, and no funds for a targeted comprehensive of plan of action to 
address violence against Indigenous women and girls specifically. Indigenous and
women's organizations have called on Canada to take comprehensive action now to 
implement recommendations from the United Nations treaty bodies to reduce 
murdered and missing Indigenous women and girls before the national inquiry's 
report is released. 
 
 
http://fafia-afai.org/en/press-release-coalition-calls-for-urgent-action-to-stop
-violence-against-indigenous-women-and-girls-%EF%BB%BF/[3]
 
 
The National Inquiry's report is due out in less than a month and there is no 
budget set aside to implement whatever recommendations come from that report 
either. The limited funds for commemoration seems not only inadequate, but also 
premature given that the crisis has not abated. Where is the urgent and 
sustained help for the many families deeply impacted by the abuse, exploitation,
trafficking, disappearances and murders of thousands of Indigenous women and 
girls?
 
 
A particularly shocking exclusion from the budget is the lack funding for First 
Nations child and family services to address the crisis of First Nations 
children in foster care. Former Minister of Indigenous Services, Jane Philpott 
called the staggering statistics related to First Nation kids in care a 
“humanitarian crisis” - comparing it to the residential school system. She 
pledged to work with First Nations to address the critical need for funding to 
prevent apprehensions and address the root causes of over-representation, which 
include conditions of poverty. This glaring omission from the budget is 
confounding given the fact that Parliament had previously committed to targeted 
funding to accompany Bill C-92 An Act respecting First Nations, Inuit and Metis 
children, youth and families, which already been introduced in Parliament. 
Although the federal government promised significant funding to support Bill 
C-92 – there is no specified funding either in the bill or the budget. Not a 
single dollar has been allocated to support First Nations develop their own laws
and institutions specific to child and family services, hire and train staff, as
well as provide the much-needed wrap around social, educational and health 
services to families in need as advocated in the Spirit Bear Plan.
 
 
https://fncaringsociety.com/sites/default/files/Spirit%20Bear%20Plan%20%28EN%29.
pdf[4]
 
 
Dr. Cindy Blackstock, the head of the First Nation Child and Family Caring 
Society welcomed the additional funding for Jordan’s Principle, however 
explained that it does not go far enough and many children – like non-status 
Indian children are still excluded. Jordan’s Principle is a child-first 
principle which aims to ensure First Nation children can access all public 
services in a culturally-appropriate way, without any delays or hurdles because 
they are First Nations. The federal budget pledges $1.2 billion over three 
years. However, the flat funding does not take into account population growth 
over the funded years, or the rising cost of inflation. There are also no 
additional funds to address the thousands of First Nation children who will be 
newly entitled to Indian status as a result of Bill S-3 An Act to Amend the 
Indian Act (elimination of sex-based inequities in registration) or from the 
revised unstated paternity policy in relation to registration. Both of these 
issues are the result of the federal government losing two court cases 
(Descheneaux and Gehl) on discrimination against First Nations women and 
children. 
 
 
Yet, despite the legal obligation to provide funding, none has been identified 
in this budget. This limited funding is not an act of reconciliation. The 
federal has been dragged to this point - kicking and screaming - by the Canadian
Human Rights Tribunal, with no less than five non-compliance orders for failing 
to end discrimination in funding of First Nation children in care. So, while the
extra funding is welcome, it is not a “gift”. 
 
 
A particularly disturbing omission is the lack of targeted funding for First 
Nation women and their descendants who would newly entitled to Indian status 
under Bill S-3. The bill has been in place for a year and will add thousands to 
the registration list, yet no new funds have been identified for education, 
health or housing for individuals or First Nations. This is despite the fact 
that the United Nations just agreed with Sharon McIvor that the Indian Act still
discriminates against the descendants of First Nations women who married-out, 
and directed Canada to provide full reparation. This means registering them and 
providing much-needed social programs. Similarly, there is no targeted funding 
to address the increase in registration due to Lynn Gehl's successful court case
against Canada for it's discriminatory unstated paternity policy. At every turn,
First Nations women and children are forced to wait for justice and are denied 
their basic human rights and access to the same programs and services available 
to their fathers, brothers and uncles. 
 
 
One of the most under-served categories of First Nations are those living 
off-reserve. Approximately 33% of First Nations live off-reserve in Canada, and 
a disproportionate number of families are headed by single Indigenous mothers. 
Metis and Inuit don’t live on reserves at all – therefore the majority of 
Indigenous peoples live off-reserve. The amount allocated in the budget is a 
mere $60 million over 5 years to help fund off-reserve organizations like native
friendship centres. That is barely $10 million a year – nowhere near what is 
needed to address urgent housing, education, and health needs for more than 
800,000 Indigenous peoples living off-reserve – let alone the growing 
homelessness crisis plaguing Indigenous peoples. Niigaan Sinclair reports in the
Winnipeg Free Press that the chronic under-funding is made worse by the fact 
that federal bureaucrats and other consultants and contractors, suck up nearly 
50% of all funding appropriated by Parliament for First Nations. With three 
departments now directly responsible for Indigenous and Northern Affairs, who is
to say whether First Nations will see much of this funding at all, let alone 
Indigenous women and children.
 
 
https://www.winnipegfreepress.com/opinion/columnists/new-dollars-sure-but-same-p
olitical-game-507393892.html?fbclid=IwAR3jyFhBNuvatzHwVlW-JLWn28sw4MWAdhaGPfD2_s
trkkdgeiRGRJ0nQsU[5]
 
 
While there are many other problems with federal budget 2019, the most glaring 
omission is the exclusion of Indigenous women and children. Back in 2016, the 
Liberal government promised a gender based analysis for future budgets. Yet, 
this budget lacks a gender-based, human rights-based and Indigenous rights-based
analysis that focuses on not just policy objectives like reconciliation, but 
concrete domestic and international legal obligations. There is no mention of 
returning lands and resources back to First Nations, no mention of a financial 
plan in relation to treaty implementation or how the federal government will 
ensure Indigenous women’s voices are at the many negotiating tables they fund. 
This budget is a disgrace and does little to address any of the pressing 
Indigenous issues impacting Indigenous women and children like kids in care, 
murdered and missing Indigenous women, over-incarceration, homelessness, unequal
access to Indian status, poverty and poor health outcomes. Trudeau makes good 
use of flowery speeches and tearful apologies to Indigenous peoples, but has 
left Indigenous women and children far behind - again. 
 
 
Perhaps Prime Minister Trudeau should give some Indigenous women a call and 
figure out how to amend the budget so it better reflects the law in this 
country. At least, that's what a feminist Prime Minister would do.
 
 
 
APTN Panel discussion on Federal Budget 2019 and what it means for Indigenous 
Peoples:
 
https://tinyurl.com/y689zmyh[6]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Links: 
[1]: https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-xA-72CnaRJc/XJLTGInW6YI/AAAAAAAAAjQ/Nrl5Vj_Tpe4Npv9KT0ktsZu_0ymmRThdQCLcBGAs/s1600/afnpampalmater%2B-%2Bben%2Bpowless.jpg (link)
[2]: https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-xA-72CnaRJc/XJLTGInW6YI/AAAAAAAAAjQ/Nrl5Vj_Tpe4Npv9KT0ktsZu_0ymmRThdQCLcBGAs/s320/afnpampalmater%2B-%2Bben%2Bpowless.jpg (image)
[3]: http://fafia-afai.org/en/press-release-coalition-calls-for-urgent-action-to-stop-violence-against-indigenous-women-and-girls-%EF%BB%BF/ (link)
[4]: https://fncaringsociety.com/sites/default/files/Spirit%20Bear%20Plan%20%28EN%29.pdf (link)
[5]: https://www.winnipegfreepress.com/opinion/columnists/new-dollars-sure-but-same-political-game-507393892.html?fbclid=IwAR3jyFhBNuvatzHwVlW-JLWn28sw4MWAdhaGPfD2_strkkdgeiRGRJ0nQsU (link)
[6]: https://tinyurl.com/y689zmyh (link)

