---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Nationhood
Title: Indigenous issues slowly disappear from election 2019
Author: Pam Palmater
Date: Wed, 16 Oct 2019 10:34:00 -0400
Link: http://indigenousnationhood.blogspot.com/2019/10/indigenous-issues-slowly-disappear-from.html
 
[image 1 (link #2)][1]
*This picture was taken by Michelle Girouard and the logo is from from The 
Lawyer's Daily). This article was originally published in The Lawyer's Daily on 
Oct.15, 2019 (see link below).
 
The unofficial slogan for the 2015 Liberal election campaign was “there is no 
relationship more important to Canada than the one with Indigenous peoples.” It 
was a mantra shared repeatedly by Justin Trudeau pre- and post-election and 
stood in stark contrast to former Conservative Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s 
adversarial relationship with First Nations. In fact, it was Trudeau’s election 
promise to make Indigenous issues a political priority, together with his 
commitment to a nation-to-nation relationship grounded in respect for Indigenous
rights, that helped his party win the Indigenous vote.
 
While not all Indigenous people voted for the Liberals, record numbers of them 
voted — largely to help the Liberals unseat the Conservatives. Fast forward to 
this election and Trudeau started his campaign with a speech that focused on the
middle class and ignored Indigenous peoples entirely. Indigenous issues then 
seemed to slowly disappear.
 
In addition to not mentioning Indigenous peoples in his first campaign speech, 
Trudeau also didn’t show up for the first leaders’ debate hosted by Maclean’s 
and Citytv, which is, in essence also failing to show up on Indigenous issues. 
While the Maclean’s debate started out well, with strong interventions from 
Elizabeth May of the Green Party, the void left by Trudeau’s absence allowed the
leader of the Conservatives, Andrew Scheer, to turn every question on Indigenous
issues into a discussion on forcing approval of natural resource projects 
regardless of First Nation opposition. At one point, he spoke against Indigenous
groups “holding hostage” resource projects — the same kind of aggressive 
stereotypes used by the former Harper government that paint First Nations as 
dangerous. While both May and NDP leader Jagmeet Singh called him on this 
disrespectful language, Trudeau was missing in action and not there to provide 
the kind of response Canadians expect of a leader who claimed to be committed to
respectful nation-to-nation relations with Indigenous peoples.
 
Trudeau’s absence also allowed the candidates the extra time to turn questions 
about the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
(UNDRIP) and the dire need for safe drinking water on reserves into a debate 
over Trudeau’s handling of the SNC Lavalin case. While the host, with the 
exception of one attempt at redirection, allowed the Indigenous issues segment 
to devolve into pipelines and SNC Lavalin, the candidates also used their 
precious time to take digs at Trudeau and neglected to focus on Indigenous 
issues.
 
Given that the National Inquiry into Murdered and Missing Indigenous Women and 
Girls concluded that Canada is guilty of both historic and ongoing race-based 
genocide against Indigenous peoples, which specifically targets Indigenous women
and girls; it is unfathomable that this was not even a question by the moderator
or debated by the candidates. Early on Indigenous families feared that the 
urgent action required to end genocide against Indigenous women and girls would 
be lost to talk of pipelines and elections. Sadly, and shamefully, this has 
become a reality.
 
The first leaders debate which included Trudeau, focused more on pipelines, 
climate change and taxes for the middle class than on Indigenous questions asked
or the multiple, overlapping crises brought about by ongoing genocide which is 
literally killing Indigenous peoples. While this is in part the fault of the 
host for framing the first question around Scheer’s proposed pipeline corridor 
and inviting debate about pipelines instead of focusing on Indigenous 
priorities, the candidates also had a responsibility to refocus the debate.
 
Trudeau, May, and Singh have platforms with significant commitments on 
Indigenous issues, yet all failed to promote these commitments during the debate
or force discussion on the bigger issues like murdered and missing Indigenous 
women; the crisis of Indigenous kids in foster care; the over-representation of 
Indigenous peoples in prison; or the extreme poverty on many reserves. Neither 
Maxime Bernier, leader of the Peoples Party of Canada, nor Bloc Leader 
Yves-Francois Blanchet made much of contribution to the debate on Indigenous 
issues at all.
 
At this stage, it doesn’t look like Indigenous issues will feature prominently 
in the rest of the campaign and are at risk of disappearing entirely from focus.
This development is in no way benign or the natural ebb and flow of election 
campaigns. This appears to be a purposeful strategy to take focus away from the 
national inquiry’s finding of genocide in relation to murdered and missing 
Indigenous women and girls; the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal (CHRT) finding of
willful and reckless racial discrimination against First Nations children; the 
many interventions of the United Nations treaty bodies about Canada’s grave 
human rights violations of Indigenous peoples; and the failure to address water 
issues on reserve.
 
Moreover, Trudeau’s long list of promises, like the promise to repeal former 
Prime Minister Harper’s legislative suite imposed on First Nations; the 
amendment of Bill C-51 (Anti-Terrorism Act) legislation to address its negative 
impacts on First Nations; the promise to review federal laws to ensure 
compliance with s. 35 of the Constitution Act (Aboriginal and treaty rights); 
and the promise to implement UNDRIP in an unqualified way, all remain 
unfulfilled.
 
The Assembly of First Nations (AFN) is not without fault here. They are a major 
barrier to the development of an actual nation-to-nation relationship with First
Nations and have failed to strenuously demand accountability for the deaths of 
Indigenous peoples from Canada’s own laws, policies and practices. Instead, the 
AFN has been so busy praising the Trudeau government and encouraging First 
Nations to vote, that they too have failed to really push the candidates to 
prioritize Indigenous issues.
 
Instead, the AFN issued a laundry list of so-called priorities that focus on 
meetings, processes, dialogue and more paternalistic federal laws and policies. 
All of which translates into millions of dollars for the AFN, but little 
substantive change at the local First Nation level — the actual rights-bearing 
governments. Any party platform that grounds reconciliation in a relationship 
exclusively through the AFN condemns us all to the status quo.
 
Trudeau has deflected the growing national crises in First Nations thus allowing
the Conservatives to downplay their political commitments, if any, to Indigenous
peoples. When the two governing parties set the agenda in this way, it has a 
ripple effect. If the prime minister is no longer considering Indigenous issues 
a priority, what kind of message does that send to doctors, teachers and social 
workers? How bad has it become that both the Liberals and the Conservatives 
agree that appealing the CHRT decision is better than ending racial 
discrimination against First Nation children in care? If the AFN praises Trudeau
in the face of broken promises, why would the public demand more?
 
While the Green Party and NDP have made significant commitments in their 
platforms to address many of these urgent issues, practically speaking, neither 
will likely form the next government. So, while their attempts to elevate the 
urgency of these issues are commendable, their ability to raise the bar past the
very low bar set by the two so-called governing parties, is limited. The ripple 
effect will then be felt in the mainstream media coverage and the opinions of 
everyday Canadians.
 
This reconciliation train is now headed in the opposite direction of what was 
intended by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission Calls to Action or the 
National Inquiry’s Calls for Justice. How is it possible for Canada to be found 
guilty of genocide in June and then federal leaders focus their campaigns on 
middle class jobs and taxes in September? Indigenous peoples continue to die at 
alarming rates from Canada’s infrastructure of racist laws, policies and 
practices.
 
Reconciliation cannot be achieved if its lifespan is dictated by what carries 
political currency in each election. The leaders all have a legal and moral 
obligation — and historic opportunity — to do better. The question is whether 
Indigenous issues can be resurrected in a substantive and meaningful way before 
the election — but that doesn’t seem likely. 
 
 
*This article was originally published in The Lawyer's Daily on October 15, 2019
at this link: https://www.thelawyersdaily.ca/articles/15967/indigenous-issues-sl
owly-disappear-from-election-2019-pamela-palmater?category=opinion[3]
 
 
Links: 
[1]: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-GuOrmNPS0sk/XaeLnddYVQI/AAAAAAAAAsU/S1MY-_-B1hc_Xw376UbOBr5PMkfRSFIiwCLcBGAsYHQ/s1600/OPINION.png (link)
[2]: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-GuOrmNPS0sk/XaeLnddYVQI/AAAAAAAAAsU/S1MY-_-B1hc_Xw376UbOBr5PMkfRSFIiwCLcBGAsYHQ/s320/OPINION.png (image)
[3]: https://www.thelawyersdaily.ca/articles/15967/indigenous-issues-slowly-disappear-from-election-2019-pamela-palmater?category=opinion (link)

