---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Rising
Title: The Paris Agreement Does Not Recognize Indigenous Rights
Author: Dallas Goldtooth
Date: Fri, 17 Nov 2017 14:44:40 -0500
Link: https://indigenousrising.org/1949-2/
 
For Immediate Release:
 
Friday November 17th, 2017 
 
PRESS CONTACT:
 
Jade Begay, Communications Coordinator – Indigenous Environmental Network (IEN)
 
jade@ienearth.org[1], whatsapp +1 505 699 4791
 
Dallas Goldtooth, dallas@ienearth.org 
 
The Paris Agreement Does Not Recognize Indigenous Rights
 
On the final day of the UNFCCC COP23, the Indigenous Environmental Network and 
its allies face a long road to have Indigenous Rights upheld in Climate Accord. 
 
Bonn, Germany – Today, November 17, 2017, The United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 23rd Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 
23) has come to an end. And while progress has been made on the UNFCCC 
traditional knowledge Platform for engagement of local communities and 
Indigenous Peoples, Indigenous Peoples’ rights are not fully recognized in the 
final platform document of COP 23. The burden of implementation falls on local 
communities and indigenous peoples.
 
Tom BK Goldtooth from the final day of the Climate Talks in Bonn Germany[2]. 
“The primary work of the Indigenous Caucus within the UN climate conference 
focused on a platform that was established in Paris in 2015, in the Paris 
Agreement. This platform is through decision 1/CP.21 paragraph 135, with a 
mandate to facilitate the integration of indigenous and local knowledge systems 
as well as the engagement of Indigenous peoples and local communities related to
climate change action, programs and policies. The challenge for our Indigenous 
Caucus is that the countries that are parties to this UN climate conference are 
very cautious on the process and rules for inclusion of Indigenous peoples in a 
decision-making role in the operationalizing of the platform. We need to be 
clear that on the final day of this two week 23rd Session of the Conference the 
Parties (COP 23), of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) has not recognized our rights. The final document from the parties to 
this conference says they only will ‘consider their respective obligations on 
the rights of indigenous peoples and local communities.” 
 
Alberto Saldamando, Attorney and Expert on Human Rights and Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, IEN “We are not waving the victory flags yet, the local communities and
Indigenous peoples platform does not recognize the rights of Indigenous peoples 
in the human rights sense of the term “recognize”. It only “recalls” the UN 
Declaration on the rights of Indigenous peoples in its preamble. Given the 
resistance of States during these negotiations to fully recognize the rights of 
Indigenous peoples, the task for a greater recognition of our rights as peoples 
will be difficult” Saldamando further says, “The platform for traditional 
knowledge is merely that. It should allow Indigenous knowledge holders to advise
and inform the UN climate conference in mitigation and adaptation. Although we 
would hope that it would, the platform does not necessarily protect forests or 
rights. That is yet to be determined as we proceed on the path of 
implementation. It is not even implemented yet. This decision only allows us to 
participate in operationalizing it, sometime in the future, at the next UNFCCC 
COP 24. Notwithstanding what has been reported we are not negotiating or 
decision making. The platform will only recommend.”
 
Dallas Goldtooth, IEN “During the COP23 conference there has been engaged 
discussion on the mitigation of climate change and the implementation of the 
agreements made in Paris during COP21. However, it’s been a real struggle to get
parties, nation-states, to take the sincere steps needed to addressing the 
climate chaos we are seeing across the globe. There has more emphasis on 
building up the monetization of forests and trading carbon than there has been 
on the managed decline of fossil fuel production, and Indigenous peoples are 
right in the middle of this. We need international solidarity for Keeping Fossil
Fuels in the Ground and to reject carbon trading as a climate solution. We must 
exert our our power as citizens of the world to protect indigenous rights, 
address the climate chaos, and to defend the sacred integrity of Mother Earth. I
firmly believe in the collective power of us all to make the changes we need to 
see.” 
 
 
It is our understanding that the false solutions of carbon marketing offsetting 
greenhouse gas emissions offered by the US White House representatives or 
California’s very own Governor Jerry Brown will cause more harm to humanity and 
continue to silence indigenous voices and our existence. False solutions like 
these are cancerous and have negative impacts like respiratory problems and 
autoimmune diseases.
 
Daniel Ilario, Idle No More SF Bay: “The It Takes Roots delegation put direct 
pressure on the California’s government at COP 23 demanding that we move away 
from the false solution of carbon pricing that increase pollution at the source 
and violate indigenous sovereignty. During Governor Jerry Brown’s “We are still 
in” the Paris agreement speech, we stood up and demanded that California keep 
fossil fuels in the ground. His response, threatening to put us in the ground, 
illustrates that government representatives, funded by corporations, are willing
to put our lives at risk to protect the colonial capitalist system. We stand 
with our indigenous brothers and sisters around the world who are directly 
impacted by the extreme energy extraction systems, and we build on our 
collective power to create a livable future for generations to come.”
 
Isabella Zizi Idle No More SF Bay: “We as indigenous people understand that it 
is wrong to commodify the rights of nature and the rights of Mother Earth. It is
disrupting her natural system when plants are being genetically modified and 
when our air and water rights are privatized by those who have lost their 
original instructions. We call upon our brothers and sisters across the globe to
join us in this movement of resistance in your communities, not just in the 
streets, but in local governance offices. It is time to stop harming indigenous 
peoples from the north and south, and to acknowledge their traditional 
ecological knowledge. We can be the solution to create a sustainable life for 
all humanity.” 
 
[image 1 (link #4)][3]
 
It Takes Roots
 
http://ittakesroots.org/[5]
 
Carbon Pricing Report
 
http://www.ienearth.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Carbon-Pricing-A-Critical-Per
spective-for-Community-Resistance-Online-Version.pdf[6]
 
Final Text – Local Communities and Indigenous Platform 
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/sbsta/eng/l29.pdf[7]
 
 
Links: 
[1]: mailto:jade@ienearth.org (link)
[2]: https://www.democracynow.org/2017/11/17/tom_goldtooth_carbon_trading_is_fraudulent (link)
[3]: http://indigenousrising.org/1949-2/screen-shot-2017-11-17-at-19-57-43/#main (link)
[4]: http://indigenousrising.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Screen-Shot-2017-11-17-at-19.57.43-150x150.png (image)
[5]: http://ittakesroots.org/ (link)
[6]: http://www.ienearth.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Carbon-Pricing-A-Critical-Perspective-for-Community-Resistance-Online-Version.pdf (link)
[7]: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2017/sbsta/eng/l29.pdf (link)

