---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Nationhood
Title: A Modern Treaty to Save Our Peoples and The Planet
Author: Pam Palmater
Date: Mon, 09 Mar 2020 12:30:00 -0400
Link: http://indigenousnationhood.blogspot.com/2020/03/a-modern-treaty-to-save-our-peoples-and.html
 
[image 1 (link #2)][1]
 
(Left to Right: Stephen Lewis, Pam Palmater, David Suzuki, photo by Ian Mauro 
Climate Tour 2019)
 
This blog is an excerpt of the speech that I gave at the Climate Tour with David
Suzuki and Stephen Lewis, on October 4, 2019 in Winnipeg, Manitoba at the 
University of Winnipeg on Treaty 1 territory. (Check against delivery).
 
Kwe n’in telusi Pam Palmater. It is an honour to be here on Indigenous territory
covered by Treaty one. Thanks to the elder for opening & to UofW for hosting us.
Oct.4th important day to remember lives lost due to murdered and missing 
Indigenous women and girls.
 
We have a hard truth to face. We are in the middle of two major crises: Canada 
is killing our people and the planet and we are here to stop it!
 
The first crisis is that the National Inquiry into Murdered and Missing 
Indigenous Women and Girls found that Canada has and continues to commit 
genocide against Indigenous peoples – specifically targeting Indigenous Women 
and Girls.
 
The second crisis is that Indigenous science and western science have both 
confirmed that we are headed for a massive climate disaster.
 
To say that we are in a crisis of epic proportions would be an understatement. 
We need to act now to end the genocide of Indigenous peoples & stop the ecocide 
of the earth. Because we know that the pain of Indigenous peoples is the same 
pain felt by the planet. And the pain of this planet is felt first and foremost 
by Indigenous peoples.
 
Settler governments in Canada, the United States, Australia, New Zealand and all
over the world have colonized Indigenous territories with horrific acts of 
violence to peoples and the earth. The colonizing mentality pervades our 
governing systems and allows governments and corporations to treat people and 
the planet as resources to exploit - as though they were lifeless commodities. 
Extractive economies – now largely benefiting transnational corporations - have 
been authorized by governments land leave destruction in their wake.
 
We’ve seen tears from Indigenous mothers whose daughters have been murdered by 
the thousands. We’ve also seen the heartbreak of killer whale mothers mourning 
the losses of their offspring who can’t survive in an oil tanker dominated 
eco-systems.
 
And if we, as First Nations and Canadians, don’t act quickly - many more people,
plants and animals will die. We no longer have the time to debate politics – the
crisis in Canada is now a matter of life and death for all of us. It won’t be 
good enough in 50 years to look back and say we tried, we had the best 
intentions, or we gave it our best effort.
 
We either do or die.
 
And right now, Indigenous peoples are dying. Our planet is dying. But you all 
know this. We can no more deny the ecocide of climate change, than we can deny 
genocide of Indigenous peoples. The statistics, the research and the scientific 
evidence before our eyes is too overwhelming. Climate change is greatest threat 
to all life on earth – humans, plants and animals.
 
Who bears the disproportionate burden of environmental destruction, water 
contamination and more pipelines? Indigenous peoples do. That is because 
genocide and ecocide go hand in hand. This earth has suffered a great assault, 
in part because of massive human rights violations to its caretakers – 
Indigenous peoples. Similarly, Indigenous peoples have suffered a great genocide
in part because of the violence committed against our lands, waters, and 
ecosystems on which we depend.
 
Our society’s economy has been constructed in a way which exploits ands abuses 
Indigenous women and the land with relative impunity. Well now, we all stand to 
pay the price of the impending climate disaster and corresponding the human 
disaster that will follow - all while large corporations reap the benefits.
 
In the end – we will all suffer – if there is no drinkable water, farmable land 
or pollinators.
 
What we need is a new treaty - a modern treaty that binds us all together - the 
people and the planet. A treaty that commits us to work together for the benefit
of all Nations of peoples and living beings without discrimination, racism, 
sexism genocide or ecocide. A treaty that commits all people to heal our 
divisions so we can commit to protecting our collective futures.
 
We must remember that our collective futures includes the plants, animals, birds
,fish, and insect Nations. They too have as much right to live on this planet as
we do and if we have any hope of surviving, we’ll need every bee hive, every 
coral reef and every killer whale pod to maintain our precious eco-systems.
 
This modern treaty can be a reality.
 
It doesn’t matter what we call it, whose idea it was, where it originated or 
whether we agree on all aspects of it. This new treaty is about combining social
justice and earth justice together to pave the way to a better future for all. 
The dual crises facing us requires that we do everything in our collective power
to save our planet.
 
This will require a societal revolution that goes beyond superficial changes and
the glacial pace at which governments operate. It will require that we change 
everything and that will mean we need to get uncomfortable.
 
We don’t need everyone for a revolution to save the planet. We don't have time 
to wait around until the genocide and climate change deniers are convinced. If 
we wait, it will be too late for us all.
 
Every single right we have ever gained – human rights, environmental protections
or native rights – have been advanced by small numbers of people – sometimes 
only individuals pushing forward despite the odds. We can do this with all of 
you in this room. But we cant wait for all of you. We will forge ahead because 
we have to - its the only way to give Indigenous peoples and this planet a 
fighting chance.
 
Other people will join when they see our successes. There will always be 
genocide deniers & climate change deniers, but we have an obligation to forge 
ahead anyway. If the lands are toxic from tar sands, and the water polluted from
mining, none of our children will survive - whether they are Canadian or 
Indigenous. That’s why we need to work together.
 
Together, we not only have the power to stop these abuses, but we can return 
Canada to its original treaty vision. Every single one of you has the power to 
stand up for what is right and save not only yourselves, but all those who can’t
advocate on their own - for all of those whose voices that are not counted – the
bees, the whales, the trees and the tiniest insects.
 
None of you can do it alone and we don’t expect you to - the original treaty 
vision for Canada was premised on us working together to benefit from and 
protect the lands and waters which sustain us.
Our advantage and our strength is in our collectives.
 
Canada wouldn’t even exist without the treaty agreements between sovereign 
Indigenous Nations and the Crown. This original treaty vision was meant to 
protect the ecosystem on Turtle Island for as long as long as the grass grows, 
the rivers flow and sun shines.
 
We are faced with two global crises – genocide and ecocide.
 
We must use the spirit and intent of our original treaties to forge a new future
Canadians – get out and vote in your system – use your numbers, your wealth, 
your influence and your privilege to force the change. But don’t stop there – 
the pressure must continue in full force post election in all forums - in 
Parliamentary and Senate Committees, in where you spend you money (or don't), in
the media, in the boardroom, in your advocacy and at the United Nations.
 
Indigenous peoples will always be there on front lines, but we cant do it alone 
– we need you and you need us.
 
Our very lives depend on it.
 
We can protect the lands and waters and we can save lives. I believe in the 
power of the people to rise up and be the government of the people, by the 
people, for the people as it was intended. This generation was meant to lead our
Nations back to balance. We were meant to protect this territory for our future 
generations. I believe in the power of our peoples to unite under a new treaty.
 
Let’s end genocide against Indigenous peoples and ecocide against our planet.
 
Lets work together for the radical changes we need to save our people and the 
planet.
 
Wel'al'iog.
 
 
 
Links: 
[1]: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-sz_M3GC53rY/XmbJ7j2I_CI/AAAAAAAAAvM/vwBMdfwg6VEGt8JAiuD9LEhc1NHnFfPXQCLcBGAsYHQ/s1600/canva%2Bdesign.png (link)
[2]: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-sz_M3GC53rY/XmbJ7j2I_CI/AAAAAAAAAvM/vwBMdfwg6VEGt8JAiuD9LEhc1NHnFfPXQCLcBGAsYHQ/s320/canva%2Bdesign.png (image)

