---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Anishinabek News
Title: Oneida Nation of the Thames runner inspires others to pursue personal 
goals
Author: Laura Barrios
Date: Fri, 29 Apr 2022 07:00:50 -0400
Link: http://anishinabeknews.ca/2022/04/29/oneida-nation-of-the-thames-runner-inspires-others-to-pursue-personal-goals/
 
[image 1 (link #2)][1]
 
Joel Kennedy, a runner from Oneida Nation of the Thames, Bear Clan, and his son,
enjoying a run together. – Photo supplied
 
By Shirley Honyust/ Yenahtli:yo
 
This is a reflection of the interview with Joel Kennedy, the work he has done 
that led up to earning him a place competing in the 2022 Boston Marathon, among 
a select group of runners in a 50 km run this year. Kennedy is the Coordinator 
of the Urban Indigenous Healthy Living Program at N’Amerind Friendship Centre in
London, Ontario. He is from Oneida Nation of the Thames, Bear Clan.
 
In Boston, Kennedy will be running for a charity, BIPOC (who identify as Black, 
Indigenous or Other People of Colour) students which in turn awards scholarships
to students help them stay in school, meeting financial and social needs, 
creating opportunities to learn, and enabling college students to help high 
school students with their studies. Kennedy’s runs are all for charitable 
causes.
 
In 2015, when he was tipping the scales at 300lbs, he was at a birthday party 
with friends and the conversation got around to “What are you doing now?” He 
gave some serious thought to the state of his health including his obesity that 
upped his risk for diabetes, which also runs in both sides of his family. It was
then he came face-to-face with the fact that he needed to make some drastic 
changes in his eating habits and lifestyle to be in the best health for himself 
and his family.
 
Running is something he always wanted to do; however, he needed to walk first, 
so he began with 5-10 minutes at a time, working up to a stamina of 30 minutes, 
with the first goal of getting his weight under 300lbs. Doing this, he decided 
he could take part in a local run for a distance of 5 km. He finished last. 
Knowing he could do better than that, he came to realize that another task was 
accepting himself and learning to love himself while being in the moment every 
day of his life.
 
His next goal was running 5 km at work, where he got staff involved, and then 
community members joined him. The first name he gave to his team was the 
“Indigenous Runners Group” which later became the “Indigenous Runners Club” 
(IRC). He didn’t yet realize that he would be leading and learning at the same 
time. A total of 12 individuals ran a 5 km trek together and out of those, nine 
completed it.
 
In 2016, he became interested in the Longboat Roadrunners, a Toronto club that 
hosts events such as annual Toronto Island Run. Tom Longboat was in fact one of 
Kennedy’s early heroes. He had June, July, and August to train for the meet in 
September 2016. This club runs to honour the spirit of Onondaga runner Tom 
Longboat, a member of the Six Nations of the Grand River, Canadian soldier, and 
Boston Marathon Champion. In 2018, Kennedy took part in the run, Around the Bay 
30 km, held annually in Hamilton.
 
Support for the IRC came through a couple of virtual events where shirts made by
Antler River Trading Company, a local Indigenous-owned business, were created 
with the running club logo and sold at-cost to individuals promoting the IRC and
for anyone who wanted one. In total, over 500 items were sold in 2017.
 
It was around this time that Kennedy enlisted the help of a coach who encouraged
him to do a whole Marathon. There are six in total, 42,000 runners at the same 
time will run: in Chicago; New York; Tokyo; Boston; London, England; and Berlin,
Germany. Kennedy’s most challenging feat was the run in Chicago, as he had 
sprained his ankle about three weeks before this. The distance was gruelling and
it took its toll physically and mentally; it was the spiritual energy that 
pulled him through.
 
Kennedy’s first landmark is the 42 km run and the next will be the 50 km. 
Overall, he believes that the greatest landmark for him will be to compete in 
all six marathons; after Boston, there will be four left.
 
When asked about sponsorship, he was quick to say that Brooks Running Company 
donated demo running shoes to his club; however, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, 
they were unable to distribute them all. The overflow was then donated to a 
number of the evacuees who were relocated to London, Ont., during the fires that
devastated Pikangikum First Nation in July of 2021.
 
Sharing truth is Kennedy’s gift, and his family and friends encourage him to 
share his journey with others. An equally important part of his life is 
coordinating a fathers’ night once a month through his Urban Indigenous Healthy 
Living program where fathers and kids get together to share in healthy lifestyle
activities.
 
“I hope people can look at my journey, take from it and learn what they can 
accomplish. Not everyone has to be a runner to improve their health. Every 
person has their own struggles. People have connected with me, not just with 
running,” responded Kennedy when asked to share some words with others who have 
dreams and aspirations. “It all took time. Believe in yourself, share your truth
– the good, the bad and more. You can attain your goals; maybe you just have to 
work harder than you thought. Push through your obstacles, whether they are 
physical, mental, emotional, or spiritual. Accept opportunities as they present 
themselves, but don’t seek them out.”
 
Contact Joel Kennedy and follow him on Indigenous Running Club website as he 
follows his dreams, to Boston Marathon and on to the next challenge!
 
Links: 
[1]: http://anishinabeknews.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Joel-Kennedy-and-son.jpg (link)
[2]: http://anishinabeknews.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Joel-Kennedy-and-son-205x300.jpg (image)

