---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: An Indigenous History of North America
Title: An Outline of Kaskaskia History
Author: Kai
Date: Tue, 20 Aug 2013 15:03:16 -0400
Link: https://indigenoushistory.wordpress.com/2013/08/20/kaskaskia-history/
 
This blog post was written for tumblr user howoddnichole, who requested some 
information about Kaskaskia history. Most of the information comes from Richard 
White’s The Middle Ground, Wayne C. Temple’s Indian Villages of the Illinois 
Country, and the Peoria Tribal webpage[1]. 
 
The Kaskaskia people were one of the primary tribes of the Inoka (Illinois) 
Confederacy of the 1600s and onwards. They were one of the Algonquian peoples 
attacked by the Haudenosaunee in the 1600s Beaver Wars, forcing them to take 
refuge in Wisconsin and Illinois. In the mid-1600s, refugees from a variety of 
tribes lived in multitribal villages, and it was probably around then that 
people of similar languages formed the Inoka Confederacy, with large numbers 
residing at a place called Starved Rock. The conditions people lived in were 
hard, as corn often failed and hunters competed intensely for game.
 
In 1680, the Haudenosaunee started another wave of attacks, destroying the 
Kaskaskia Great Village. This sparked an initial Algonquian-French alliance, and
the French began to maintain posts at Starved Rock, where a large number of 
Kaskaskia resided. Along with them came large numbers of missionaries. Among the
people of the Inoka Confederacy, young women in particular were attracted to 
Christianity and the cult of the Virgin Mary. In some ways, it had a similar 
function to a women’s religious society by providing them with a source of 
validation for power. Other women married French coureurs de bois, creating 
formal trade relationships through marriage, which ultimately led to the French 
essentially freaking out about miscegenation and removing all their western 
posts.
 
In 1694, a Frenchman named Michel Accault tried to get married to a devout 
Christian Kaskaskia woman who was also the daughter of a chief, Aramepinchieue. 
Her father wanted the marriage to happen to strengthen the trade ties, but 
Aramepinchieue refused, drawing on both Kaskaskia ideas of sexual sovereignty 
and Catholic notions of piety. Her father ejected her from his house and tried 
to stop the church services; she and fifty women persisted, defying the male 
authorities. Eventually they compromised, and the two were married and 
Aramepinchieue’s father agreed to let the priests in, resulting in the 
Kaskaskias becoming almost universally Catholic, at least in name, by 1711.
 
The Inoka confederacy was also engaged in long-term war with the Meskwaki 
nation, and they allied with the French to nearly destroy the Meskwaki in the 
1730s. It may have been due to these wars and disease that during the 1700s the 
population of the Inoka declined significantly. The Kaskaskia resettled from 
Starved Rock to the place where the Kaskaskia River meets the Mississippi, where
they continued to intermarry with Frenchmen. Their relationship with the 
movement led by Pontiac in the 1760s was touchy, and ended with Pontiac being 
killed by some Peoria for an attack he made on an Inoka chief.
 
By the time of the American Revolution, the Kaskaskia had mostly relocated to 
the Mississippi, but a group of them, along with other Indians, allied with the 
British and moved into the Ohio country to attack the Americans to prevent their
entrance into the area. By the late 1700s, the Inoka confederacy’s population 
was devastated, and the United States negotiated a treaty with them at Vincennes
in 1803 in which the Kaskaskia ceded their territory in Illinois Country and 
received two reservations.
 
In 1832, the remaining Kaskaskia signed a treaty leaving Illinois and Missouri 
to settle with Peoria, Piankeshaw, and Wea in Kansas, with whom they officially 
formed the Confederated Peoria tribe in 1854. After the Civil War, most signed 
the Omnibus Treaty to relocate to Indian Territory, while some remained and 
became US citizens. The Dawes Act of 1898 divided the Peoria’s land into 
allotments and dissolved the traditional government; this was reinstated with 
the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of 1939. In 1959, the Peoria tribe was 
terminated, and achieved federal recognition once again in 1978.
 
Links: 
[1]: http://www.peoriatribe.com/ (link)

