---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Nationhood
Title: Reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples in Universities and Colleges
Author: Pam Palmater
Date: Fri, 17 May 2019 05:33:00 -0400
Link: http://indigenousnationhood.blogspot.com/2019/05/reconciliation-with-indigenous-peoples.html
 
[image 1 (link #2)][1]
 
Reconciliation has become the buzz word of the decade ever since the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission (TRC) of Canada published their report on residential 
schools in Canada.* The TRC, headed by (then) Justice Murray Sinclair, heard 
from residential school survivors, families and native communities from all over
Canada about their experiences in residential schools and their lives 
afterwards. These schools lasted for over 100 years, with the last one only 
closing in 1996.
 
 
Despite being called schools, residential schools were actually designed to 
separate native children from their parents, extended families and communities, 
for the express purposes of assimilating them into, what the TRC describes as 
"Euro-Christian society". Thousands of children were starved, neglected, 
tortured, medically experimented on, mentally, physically and/or sexually abused
or even murdered. Their experiences have had long-lasting, inter-generational 
impacts on many more thousands of children, grandchildren and 
great-grandchildren.
 
 
The TRC offered 94 Calls to Action directed to the federal and provincial 
governments, churches, businesses, the media, the public at large and, 
specifically, universities and colleges. The report went well beyond just the 94
specific Calls to Action – it also talked about reconciliation with native 
peoples generally. However, as is the case with many Royal Commissions, Public 
Inquiries and other similar reports, many Canadians never read them. The failure
to read the TRC report, didn’t stop people from taking the word "reconciliation"
and literally applying it to everything they do that touches on native issues 
and calling it "reconciliation". I think reconciliation has gone off track.
 
 
To my mind, the word reconciliation should have substantive meaning; not just in
the residential school context, but in the entire relationship between native 
peoples and the Crown. Firstly, it should be about exposing the whole truth of 
the genocide committed in Canada beyond residential schools. The TRC concluded 
that what happened in Canada was cultural genocide, but more than that, it was 
also physical and biological genocide. Canada needs to come to terms with that. 
It needs to come to terms with genocide in all of its forms, both historic and 
ongoing.
 
 
Secondly, reconciliation is about Canada taking full responsibility for this 
genocide.There should be no diminishing the experiences of survivors; no making 
excuses; no trying to justify what happened; no using semantics to try to 
downplay the atrocities committed; and no denying any of the harms suffered by 
native peoples. In any discussion about reconciliation, we should be centering 
the voices of the survivors and not the perpetrators, just like the TRC did.
 
 
Lastly, we can never get to real reconciliation without Canada making a real 
apology - not a court ordered apology, or carefully worded political apology 
approved by Justice lawyers. I mean a real apology where Canada:
 
 
(a) accepts responsibility for all of its actions and consequences; 
 
(b) promises never to do it again, and in fact, doesn't do it again; 
 
(c) makes full amends for ALL of the harms done - which may include 
compensation, but is not limited to compensation.
 
 
Canada, in general, seems think that a political apology, coupled with meager 
monetary compensation and some commemoration is enough to ask all of us to move 
forward. There is a real problem with moving forward when the whole truth has 
yet to be exposed. If moving forward means skipping over the rest of the truth 
and focusing on superficial acts, like renaming National Aboriginal Peoples' Day
to National Indigenous Peoples Day, then we are very far away from 
reconciliation.
 
 
It is also incredible that Canada could even fathom moving forward when it has 
failed to stop the harms from continuing. For example, while the last 
residential school closed in 1996, this was followed by the 60's scoop forced 
adoptions of native children into white families all over the world. That was 
then followed by the crisis of of over-representation in foster care. There are 
more native children stolen from their parents, families and communities today, 
than at the height of residential schools. In fact, the crisis of 
over-representation in foster care has even been acknowledged as a "humanitarian
crisis" by federal officials. 
 
 
When I say Canada, I want to be clear that I am talking about federal, 
provincial, territorial and municipal governments for sure; but also churches, 
Canadian citizens, mainstream media, corporations, businesses, universities and 
colleges. Every single person and institution in Canada has benefited from the 
genocide and dispossession committed against native peoples – either directly or
indirectly. That makes lots of people uncomfortable to hear, but it is the 
reality. Most people have long thought that the so-called "plight" of native 
peoples was the responsibility of government alone - often willfully blind to 
their own roles.
 
 
Universities, colleges and training institutes in particular, have benefited 
directly from the dispossession of native peoples from their lands and sometimes
benefited directly from Indian monies held in trust by the Crown. They have long
excluded native peoples as faculty and administrators, while at the same time 
educating countless generations of Canadians and international students a 
sanitized version of both history and the present. Native voices and realities 
has been erased by universities for many decades. While it is very positive to 
see many universities and colleges embracing the TRC report and taking concrete 
steps to advance reconciliation, it has become very clear that there is a 
fundamental misunderstanding about what reconciliation really means in a 
university context.
 
 
The TRC called on universities and colleges to undertake the following:
 
 
Call to Action #16 - Create Aboriginal language degrees and diploma programs;
 
 
Call to Action #24 - Medical and nursing schools to provide a mandatory course 
dealing with Aboriginal health issues, which includes skills-based training in 
intercultural competency, conflict resolution, human rights, and anti-racism;
 
 
Call to Action #28 - Law schools to provide a mandatory course in Aboriginal 
people and the law with required skills-based training in intercultural 
competency, conflict resolution, human rights, and anti-racism;
 
 
Call to Action #65 - Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) and
post-secondary institutions and educators establish a national research program 
with multi-year funding to advance understanding of reconciliation; and
 
 
Call to Action #86 - Journalism programs and media schools provide mandatory 
education for all students on the history of Aboriginal peoples.
 
 
However, it must be kept in mind that reconciliation goes well beyond those 
specific Calls to Action. Universities and colleges have a long way to go to 
address their role in the dispossession and oppression of native peoples - both 
historic and ongoing. However, I think this discussion needs to happen in 
reverse. Before I share some ideas about what universities should be doing to 
advance reconciliation, it may be more useful to look at some examples of what 
should NOT be considered reconciliation and why. 
 
 
Not Reconciliation list:
 
 
(1) Apologize for university’s past contribution to oppression of native 
peoples;
 
 
(2) Give a land acknowledgement;
 
 
(3) Senior administration or professors attend a First Nation community or 
pow-wow;
 
 
(4) Hang native art on campus;
 
 
(5) Change street names or building names on campus;
 
 
(6) Partake in cultural sensitivity training or Aboriginal History 101;
 
 
(7) Watch documentaries like Colonization Road;
 
 
(8) Read Thomas King’s The Inconvenient Indian (I love this book);
 
 
(9) Send a First Nation or organization an email asking what you can do to help;
 
 
(10) Hire more native peoples to reflect our % of the population;
 
 
(11) Have an elder open and close your conferences;
 
 
(12) Nominate a native person for an award;
 
 
(13) Invite native faculty to sit on committees or Senate;
 
 
(14) Create an Aboriginal Advisory Committee on campus;
 
 
(15) Send a happy National Aboriginal Day tweet or Facebook post;
 
 
(16) Include First Nations in your research projects; and/or
 
 
(17) Invite native speakers into your classrooms.
 
 
There are many universities and colleges doing a number of the above items under
the banner of reconciliation right now. Some may have even done some of these 
prior to the TRC report. However, I have seen a number of universities include 
some of these items in their reports on reconciliation. To my mind, none of 
these items fall under reconciliation. They are all important in different ways,
and universities, should be doing these things, but they are not reconciliation.
 
 
Why not? 
 
Because most of the items on the above list should already be done in 
universities and colleges as a matter of law - as per federal and provincial 
human rights laws; employment laws; non-discrimination laws; equality laws; and 
campus commitments to diversity, equity and inclusion. Universities don’t get to
pat themselves on the back for doing what they should have been doing all along 
under the law. Furthermore, some of the actions noted above should be happening 
as a matter of academic practice. If you teach about native issues, it should be
a given that native voices and content are centered. It's a matter of 
professional ethics and academic standards that faculty learn about the subjects
they teach - or ought to be teaching. 
 
 
The following represents a few things that universities should be doing under 
the banner of real reconciliation:
 
 
Real Reconciliation:
 
 
(1) Ensure that you hire native faculty and staff that reflects plus 20% extra 
hires to build institutional capacity; provide support for new hires; and to 
make amends for having excluded native peoples for all these years;
 
 
(2) There should be proportional (20%) native hires in ALL faculties and 
departments, especially politics, law, science, engineering, medicine and 
business (in addition to social work, midwifery & native studies);
 
 
(3) Do NOT ever hire just one native faculty member at a time. That is an 
incredibly unfair burden to that faculty member as everyone, even with the best 
of intentions, will want their advice, guidance, ideas and participation of that
one faculty member on every committee, project and initiative;
 
 
(4) When you hire, you must develop workloads and expectations around the fact 
that many First Nation hires will have community-based expectations/obligations 
that should be accommodated.
 
It is their connection to their First Nations, their knowledge exchange and 
community-based work that often informs who they are, how they teach and what 
they teach.That unique knowledge and experience comes with commitments to their 
home communities which takes time and energy and should be accommodated and 
counted.
 
 
(5) Don’t stop at recruitment and hiring of native faculty and staff. Think 
about what your institution does to KEEP them there, i.e., professional 
supports, active mentorship, recognition, research dollars, promotions, pay 
levels, leadership opportunities, advanced training and skill development and 
flexible or alternative work arrangements. 
 
(6) Keep current commitments to native faculty and staff. For example, if you 
have a Chair in Traditional Native Medicine, make sure that Chair is made 
permanent, funded from core university dollars and not dependent on external 
funders (i.e., supported only if the funds are available). Making reconciliation
initiatives dependent on the goodwill of corporate funders puts them all at risk
given the fact that native peoples are largely discriminated against in the 
corporate world. Universities must engage in real sacrifices - of power and 
wealth - in order to engage in real reconciliation. That means the university 
itself must dedicate and protect the funds for reconciliation initiatives - 
includes faculty, staff, chairs, research and projects.
 
 
(7) Real reconciliation is about more than who teaches, it also requires that 
native peoples also be represented in the governance and senior administration 
of universities and colleges – as Presidents, Provosts, Chancellors and on 
boards of governors. They must be part of the decision-making mechanisms 
throughout the institution - including in the unions, committees and Senate, on 
all issues, but especially those that impact native peoples specifically.
 
 
(8) Native peoples need to be the ones deciding how targeted native research 
funding is distributed; who gets research chairs in native issues; and how 
academic success is measured - that means including the community-based work and
advocacy that is an inherent part of the lived personal and professional 
realities of many native peoples.
 
 
(9) First Nations and Inuit communities need to have a direct line of input into
university programs, curricula, research and governance that impact them and 
their students. It is not good enough to have one native faculty or several 
native staff members speak for diverse Nations. The relationship needs to 
include voices inside and outside the institution.
 
 
(10) Every university and college sits on native territory should reflect local 
native languages, cultures and symbols throughout the campus, in ways that are 
directed by native peoples (with a focus on local native communities) and 
respectful of their cultures. It is not good enough to have just one dedicated 
"native" area - like a statue, park bench or student centre. Our presence must 
be reflected throughout the campus(es).
 
 
(11) The benefit and privilege of a university education and research needs to 
be fully shared with local First Nations, with more focus on open access to 
information and publications and translation of research in accessible formats 
for community use.
 
 
(12) Universities need to think about education beyond tuition-paying students 
and include strategic partnerships and alliances with native communities to help
fill research, policy and/or technical gaps that exist due to chronic 
under-funding and failure to implement treaties, by building these requirements 
into courses and research or special projects. 
 
(13) Universities could help make amends for past harms. Take for example, the 
crisis of disappearing native languages. Universities and colleges in 
partnership with native communities, elders and languages speakers, could help 
prevent native languages from extinction. Together, they could develop 
comprehensive k-12 education, as well as community-based native language 
instruction, to try to undo the devastating impacts of Canada’s assimilatory 
policies and the university's roles in it.
 
 
(14) Universities need to ensure that their reconciliation plans are 
co-developed by native communities and experts – which may include faculty, but 
also those external to the university that are not at any risk of retaliation or
ostracization. Without native peoples directing the path forward, universities 
risk of forging ahead with superficial plans, or replicating the status quo.
 
(15) Universities must also focus on the recruitment, retention and support of 
native students towards academic success. This includes not only a welcoming 
atmosphere, various student supports like housing and grants, but also native 
faculty advisors, native courses, and special research projects and other 
opportunities. 
 
(16) Universities must take active measures against the growing trend of rushing
to hire "self-identified" native peoples who are not native, not connected to 
community and have no lived experience as a native person. Universities are 
being flooded with those making false claims and universities commit further 
harms to actual native people by taking no action to prevent it from happening. 
When frauds take our places in universities as students, staff or faculty, our 
voices are once again erased and our identities over-shadowed by white ethnicity
shoppers whose only claim to Indigeneity is ancestry.com or some distant 
relative from 400 years ago. At best, these frauds skew our numbers and taint 
our research, and at worst, they proactively work against real native peoples.
 
 
(17) Universities must find ways to prevent Deans from using the same old racist
tactics, like using so-called "merit" versus "diversity" as a way to keep native
people out of universities. This perception of merit is very biased and often 
used in racist ways to discriminate against native peoples. It has been used to 
keep women out of the boardroom and with lower salaries. It has also been used 
by non-native Deans to keep native peoples out of tenure-track positions. Even 
after the TRC report, I have still seen Deans revert to this racist form of 
excluding native peoples - as if their traditional Indigenous knowledges, their 
professional experiences, their community-based work are not valued the same as 
a non-native's traditional educational background as "merit".
 
 
There is a lot to do and it will require a fundamental shift in both thinking 
and practice. It will require real changes - a transfer of both power and 
wealth. This requires that universities make sacrifices to make space for native
peoples - not simply Indigenize here and there. Universities can't simply tweak 
their current structures and expect substantive results. 
 
Clearly there is a great deal that university can and should be doing. This blog
is already too long to include a much longer list. I truly believe that some of 
this will happen in short term, and some of it will take a little longer. But 
without real native people at the helm – directing the path - it runs the risk 
of preserving the same status quo or worse. I believe that we are at a turning 
point. 
 
The TRC has helped jump start both conversation and action at the university and
college level. We just need to ensure the way forward is co-developed by native 
peoples and communities, together with universities and colleges. We have a real
opportunity to make lasting, impactful changes. Let's move beyond the 
superficial and engage in real, transformative reconciliation now - which will 
mean doing things as they haven't been done before. We're ready academia - are 
you?
 
 
For those who prefer audio, here is a link to my Warrior Life podcast based on 
this blog:
https://soundcloud.com/pampalmater/indigenous-reconciliation-in-university-and-c
olleges[3]
 
For those who want more information, here is a link to my Woodrow Lloyd Lecture 
on Reconciliation at the University of Regina in 2018:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=89s3l2mYGWg&list=PLDnK0xT7aXRBut5qi5rlJrDQWpS-Px
u1v&index=2&t=3083s[4]
 
*This blog is based on a much longer speech that I delivered in Halifax for the 
Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives in 2018.
 
 
Links: 
[1]: https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-LbWYzI76NG0/XN7vM6jCtAI/AAAAAAAAAkw/EqyIqA6V-swTXthqjK1Br0xZj5Nal4DAQCLcBGAs/s1600/Palmater_Pamela19.jpg (link)
[2]: https://4.bp.blogspot.com/-LbWYzI76NG0/XN7vM6jCtAI/AAAAAAAAAkw/EqyIqA6V-swTXthqjK1Br0xZj5Nal4DAQCLcBGAs/s320/Palmater_Pamela19.jpg (image)
[3]: https://soundcloud.com/pampalmater/indigenous-reconciliation-in-university-and-colleges (link)
[4]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=89s3l2mYGWg&list=PLDnK0xT7aXRBut5qi5rlJrDQWpS-Pxu1v&index=2&t=3083s (link)

