---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: Indigenous Nationhood
Title: Overincarceration of Indigenous peoples nothing short of genocide
Author: Pam Palmater
Date: Sat, 01 Feb 2020 09:14:00 -0500
Link: http://indigenousnationhood.blogspot.com/2020/02/overincarceration-of-indigenous-peoples.html
 
 
[image 1 (link #2)][1]
 
(Public domain image)
 
 
Canada’s colonial objectives have always been to clear the lands for settlement 
and development by whatever means necessary.
 
 
After signing peace treaties in the 1700s, clearing the lands meant laws 
offering bounties on the heads of Mi’kmaw men, women and children. In the 1800s,
clearing the lands meant ethnic cleansing on the Prairies - laws, policies and 
practices that confined native peoples to reserves
 
and gave them insufficient rations to survive. In the 1900s, clearing the lands 
meant the theft of thousands of native children to be forced into residential 
schools where thousands died from abuse, torture and starvation. In the 2000s 
clearing the lands means the mass incarceration of Indigenous peoples in prisons
paving the way for the extractive industry.
 
 
The overincarceration of Indigenous peoples in federal, provincial and 
territorial prisons in Canada today is nothing short of genocide.
 
 
On Jan. 21, 2020, Dr. Ivan Zinger, who heads the Office of the Correctional 
Investigator, issued an urgent statement about the rates of Indigenous peoples 
in federal prisons being at historic highs. While Indigenous peoples only make 
up five per cent of the Canadian population, they represent more than 30 per 
cent of those in federal prisons. Those statistics are even worse for Indigenous
women who now make up 42 per cent of the prison population. A Statistics Canada 
report released in 2018 shows that almost half of all youth in corrections are 
Indigenous as well. This is all happening at a time when incarceration rates for
the rest of Canada continue to decline. Why is this happening? Zinger states 
that federal corrections is “impervious to change” - a well-founded conclusion 
given the decades of commissions, inquiries and reports highlighting both racism
in the justice system and the devastating impact it has on Indigenous peoples.
 
 
In 1989, Chief Justice Thomas Hickman issued the final report of the Royal 
Commission on the Donald Marshall, Jr., Prosecution (Marshall Inquiry). Donald 
Marshall was a Mi’kmaw man from Nova Scotia who had been wrongly targeted by 
police and convicted of murder, spending 11 years in prison. The Marshall 
Inquiry found that the criminal justice system had failed Marshall “at virtually
every turn” due “to the fact that Donald Marshall Jr., is a Native.” The report 
provided numerous recommendations to ensure more equitable treatment of native 
peoples in the future.
 
 
A decade later, the Aboriginal Justice Inquiry of Manitoba released its report 
in relation to the
 
murder of Helen Betty Osborne whose assailants had not been brought to justice; 
and John Joseph Harper, an unarmed native politician shot dead by Winnipeg 
police. Murray Sinclair, co-commissioner for the justice inquiry and chair of 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, made similar findings to the Marshall 
Inquiry: “[t]he justice system has failed Manitoba’s Aboriginal people on a 
massive scale.” His report also made numerous recommendations in relation to 
addressing racism and discrimination against Indigenous peoples in the justice 
system and beyond.
 
 
In 2004, the Saskatchewan Commission on First Nations and Metis Peoples and 
Justice Reform found that racism was a major issue in police forces in their 
dealings with native peoples. This came on the heels of the Commission of 
Inquiry into Matters Relating to the Death of Neil Stonechild, also in 2004. 
This was an inquiry that investigated “Starlight Tours,” the arbitrary detention
of native peoples by police who are driven out of town to freeze to death at 
night. Both reports offered recommendations, but like the other reports, most 
were largely ignored.
 
 
In 2007 came the Ipperwash Inquiry in Ontario and most recently, in 2019 came 
the Final Report of the National Inquiry into Murdered and Missing Indigenous 
Women and Girls, which found Canada guilty of both historic and ongoing 
genocide. Racism in the justice system is a common theme in all of these reports
and the Office of the Correctional Investigator has been raising the alarm for 
the overincarceration of Indigenous people for two decades.
 
 
The statistics clearly show a steady rise in Indigenous incarceration from 17.5 
per cent in 2000 to 30 per cent in 2020. But these represent the national 
statistics and, like rates of murdered and missing Indigenous women and girls, 
and Indigenous children in foster care, the provincial rates can be double the 
national rates.
 
 
In Manitoba, more than 80 per cent of prisoners are Indigenous — the same 
province where 50 per cent of all women murdered and missing are Indigenous and 
90 per cent of all children in foster care are Indigenous. In Saskatchewan, 76 
per cent of prisoners were Indigenous, the same province which has more than 55 
per cent of women murdered and missing as Indigenous and 85 per cent of children
in foster care are Indigenous. We also know that more than two-thirds of 
Indigenous prisoners have been impacted by the foster care system. This is 
exactly the kind of colonial legacy that the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. 
Gladue [1999] 1 S.C.R. 688 and R. v. Ipeelee 2012 SCC 13 cases meant to address 
when they instructed judges to find alternatives to prison for Indigenous 
peoples. Is no one listening?
 
 
From the evidence, it is clear we have a direct pipeline from foster care to 
prison that seems to clear the way for pipelines on native territories. What the
statistics don’t show is the history of thenRCMP and other police forces as an 
integral part of colonial settlement and development policies that have created 
this current crisis.
 
 
From the RCMP’s Project Sitka to its massive military-style operation on 
Wet’suwet’en territory right now, native lands continue to be cleared by 
Canada’s laws, policies, practices, actions and omissions. The overincarceration
rates will continue to increase unless we address these genocidal policies once 
and for all.
 
 
While I agree with Zinger’s call for “bold and urgent action,” cultural 
programming and Indigenizing the prison will not get us there. We must confront 
racism against Indigenous peoples head on and prevent incarceration in the first
place. This means addressing racism in federal and provincial laws and policies,
as well as rampant racism in policing. In the meantime, we must begin the urgent
process of decarceration for Indigenous women and children; Indigenous peoples 
with mental health issues; and Indigenous men languishing in prisons for little 
more than navigating poverty.
 
 
 
This article was originally published by The Lawyer’s Daily 
(www.thelawyersdaily.ca), part of LexisNexis Canada Inc on January 30, 2020. 
https://www.thelawyersdaily.ca/articles/17658[3]
 
 
Links: 
[1]: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-9F1xvMdQCOE/XjX3484SOgI/AAAAAAAAAuM/kmSzoF75JkIpgq8JCUSi1P0VwL1GAeMsQCLcBGAsYHQ/s1600/judge-gavel-1461291738X4g.jpg (link)
[2]: https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-9F1xvMdQCOE/XjX3484SOgI/AAAAAAAAAuM/kmSzoF75JkIpgq8JCUSi1P0VwL1GAeMsQCLcBGAsYHQ/s320/judge-gavel-1461291738X4g.jpg (image)
[3]: https://www.thelawyersdaily.ca/articles/17658 (link)

