---

title:
created:
tags:
source:
author:

---
Feed: An Indigenous History of North America
Title: The Two-Sentence View of History
Author: Kai
Date: Fri, 13 Feb 2015 22:06:11 -0500
Link: https://indigenoushistory.wordpress.com/2015/02/14/the-two-sentence-view-of-history/
 
I’ve been reading a lot of accounts recently that argue indigenous people 
asserted much more control over many areas of the continent into the 19th 
century than modern people usually assume (check out The Native Ground by 
Kathleen DuVal or An Infinity of Nations by Michael Witgen, not to mention 
Hamalainen’s Comanche Empire) and I got to thinking about the response my post 
about the teaching of Native history[1] received.
 
One of the most common responses was along the lines of “Well, Native Americans 
didn’t contribute much to history anyway, they didn’t do much important, it’s 
sad but they were basically just wiped away by Europeans.” There is an 
incredible amount of hindsight bias in that kind of thinking. When you are 
living in a society in a time where Native people have been very carefully 
thrust out of view, it is easy to see the dominance of European-descendants as 
an inevitable, steadily progressing event. Manifest Destiny was always 
propaganda, and it has done its job beautifully.
 
Meanwhile, more and more historians and indigenous people at large are making 
powerful, nuanced demonstrations of how that view is not just a product of 
hindsight bias but also flatly incorrect for many parts of the continent. Others
have shown how the “forgetting” of the impacts of indigenous people is part of a
very deliberate political strategy in the creation of the US nation-state.
 
Yet still both laypeople and academics are skeptical that indigenous people had 
any impact on the history of the Americas besides in their legacy of 
disappearing. Why?
 
I’m starting to think it has to do with what I’m calling “two-sentence history.”
Or maybe “textbook history” might work, too. A great deal of people do not seem 
to believe history matters unless you can explain it to them in about two 
sentences. Or that history outside of what would be taught in a grade-school 
textbook is not worth bothering with. A number of people in my earlier post 
pointed out that even European history is pretty shoddily written in 
textbooks–which is true, though it still gets a better deal than non-European 
history. Textbooks have historically been written with particular goals of 
providing an easy-to-follow and patriotic nation-supporting narrative. It’s not 
necessarily bad that textbooks are a specialized kind of writing–every kind of 
writing has some specific purpose. But too many people seem to have the attitude
that any history more in-depth than that is pointless.
 
Note that the holder of the Two-Sentence View doesn’t just want you to be able 
to explain what happened in two sentences. No, you also have to be able to 
explain how and why what happened is of tangible relevance to Two-Sentence 
Viewholder right now. And then add in that what is considered “relevant” is 
largely determined by the narrative the viewholder was fed whenever they 
attended school. It’s basically a self-perpetuating cycle, with only the two 
sentences in their grade-school textbook ever being accepted as valid. Any new 
views of history are basically impossible to introduce with that sort of 
mindset.
 
This is all part of a bigger issue: why study history at all? The importance of 
history itself, any history, is increasingly challenged in the United States. 
“Why history” is an enormous question that people more thoughtful than me have 
answered, and I’m not going to try to do so. But if even mainstream history is 
being questioned, then the history of those seen as unimportant–such as 
indigenous people–doesn’t even have a chance.
 
Links: 
[1]: https://indigenoushistory.wordpress.com/2013/05/09/what-if-people-told-european-history-like-they-told-native-american-history/ (link)

